.\" Man page for ats-ctl — ATS Proxy Enterprise v3.0
.TH ATS-CTL 1 "2026-05-28" "3.0-beta" "ATS Proxy Enterprise"
.SH NAME
ats-ctl \- manage ATS Proxy Enterprise v3.0 policy
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ats-ctl
.I command
.RI [ arguments... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ats-ctl
is the command-line tool for managing the ATS Proxy Enterprise plugin
configuration without editing files by hand. It reads and writes policy
files under
.I /etc/trafficserver/plugin/
and reloads the Apache Traffic Server service after changes.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS init
Initialize configuration files from templates. Safe to run multiple times:
existing files are not overwritten.
.SS mode off|deny|whitelist|auth_all|auth_nd
Set the plugin operating mode.
.TP
.B off
Plugin loaded but transparent: all requests pass.
.TP
.B deny
Only domains in the deny list are blocked. Everything else passes without authentication.
.TP
.B whitelist
Only domains in the whitelist are allowed. Everything else receives 403 Forbidden.
.TP
.B auth_all
Authentication required for all requests (except admin IPs). Valid credentials
override deny and whitelist rules.
.TP
.B auth_nd
Deny blocks before authentication; whitelist bypasses authentication;
all other domains require valid credentials.
.SS deny add|remove <domain>
Add or remove a domain from the deny list. Supports exact matches
.RI ( bad.com )
and suffix patterns
.RI ( ".*\e\e.ru$" ).
.SS whitelist add|remove <domain>
Add or remove a domain from the whitelist. Whitelisted domains bypass
authentication in all modes except
.BR auth_all .
.SS admin add|remove <ip>
Add or remove an IP address from the admin bypass list. Admin IPs are not
subject to deny, whitelist, or authentication rules.
.SS user add <name> [password]
Add a user. If password is omitted, it is prompted silently.
Passwords are stored as
.IR salt $sha256(salt+password) .
.SS user remove <name>
Remove a user.
.SS status
Print current mode, deny count, whitelist count, admin count, and user count.
.SS reload
Restart the ATS service to apply configuration changes.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/trafficserver/plugin/filter.conf
Main configuration: mode and INCLUDE directives.
.TP
.I /etc/trafficserver/plugin/deny.list
Blocked domains (one per line).
.TP
.I /etc/trafficserver/plugin/whitelist.list
Allowed domains (one per line).
.TP
.I /etc/trafficserver/plugin/admin.list
Admin IP addresses (one per line).
.TP
.I /etc/trafficserver/plugin/auth.conf
Users with salted SHA-256 password hashes.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B ATS_PROXY_CONFIG_DIR
Override configuration directory (default:
.IR /etc/trafficserver/plugin ).
.TP
.B ATS_PROXY_TEMPLATE_DIR
Override template directory used by
.B init
(default:
.IR <repo>/config ).
.TP
.B ATS_TRAFFICSERVER_CTL
Override path to trafficserver binary used by
.B reload
(default:
.IR /opt/trafficserver/bin/trafficserver ).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ats-proxy-filter (7),
.BR trafficserver (8)
