.\" Man page for ats-proxy-filter — ATS Proxy Enterprise v3.0
.TH ATS-PROXY-FILTER 7 "2026-05-28" "3.0-beta" "ATS Proxy Enterprise"
.SH NAME
ats-proxy-filter \- URL filtering and authentication plugin for Apache Traffic Server
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ats-proxy-filter
is a shared object plugin for Apache Traffic Server that provides URL filtering
and HTTP Basic Authentication for forward proxy deployments.

The plugin hooks into
.B TS_HTTP_OS_DNS_HOOK
and inspects the
.B Host
header of every client request. Based on the configured mode and policy files,
it either forwards the request, returns
.B 403 Forbidden
(domain denied or not in whitelist), or returns
.B 407 Proxy Authentication Required
(client must provide valid credentials).
.SH MODES
The plugin supports five operating modes, set via
.B MODE
in
.IR /etc/trafficserver/plugin/filter.conf .
.TP
.B off
Plugin is loaded but transparent. All requests pass through unchanged.
Useful for debugging and quick rollback without editing plugin.config.
.TP
.B deny
Only domains listed in
.I deny.list
are blocked with
.BR 403 .
All other domains pass without authentication. No user credentials needed.
.TP
.B whitelist
Only domains listed in
.I whitelist.list
are allowed. All other domains receive
.BR 403 .
No authentication needed.
.TP
.B auth_all
Authentication is required for every request. Valid credentials override
deny and whitelist rules. IPs in
.I admin.list
bypass all checks.
.TP
.B auth_nd
Deny rules are evaluated first: denied domains always receive
.B 403
even with valid credentials. Whitelisted domains pass without authentication.
All other domains require valid credentials.
.SH DECISION ORDER
For each request, the plugin checks in this order:
.IP 1.
Admin IP? \fBPass\fR (bypass everything).
.IP 2.
Denied domain? \fB403 Forbidden\fR (always, in all modes except off).
.IP 3.
Whitelisted domain? \fBPass\fR (no auth in deny/whitelist/auth_nd; auth required in auth_all).
.IP 4.
Valid credentials? \fBPass\fR.
.IP 5.
No valid credentials? \fB407 Proxy Authentication Required\fR.
.SH AUTHENTICATION
The plugin implements HTTP Basic Authentication (RFC 7617). Passwords are
never stored in plain text. The configuration file stores
.IR salt $sha256(salt+password) .
The plugin uses constant-time comparison to prevent timing attacks.

Use
.B ats-ctl user add
to generate entries. Do not write hashes by hand.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/trafficserver/plugin/filter.conf
Main configuration. Contains
.B MODE
and
.B INCLUDE
directives pointing to the list files below.
.TP
.I /etc/trafficserver/plugin/deny.list
Blocked domain patterns. Supports exact match
.RI ( bad.com )
and suffix match with
.B .*
prefix
.RI ( ".*\e\e.ru$" ).
.TP
.I /etc/trafficserver/plugin/whitelist.list
Allowed domain patterns. Same syntax as deny.list.
.TP
.I /etc/trafficserver/plugin/admin.list
IP addresses that bypass all filtering and authentication.
.TP
.I /etc/trafficserver/plugin/auth.conf
User entries in the format
.IR "USER <name> <salt>$<sha256>" .
.SH BUILD
The plugin source is
.IR src/ats_proxy_filter_v30.c .
It compiles as C for ATS 9.x and as C++17 for ATS 10.x. Use
.B scripts/compile-plugin.sh
with
.B --c
or
.B --cxx
flag.
.SH SECURITY
.IP \(bu
Passwords at rest: salted SHA-256, not plain text.
.IP \(bu
Password comparison: constant-time, resistant to timing attacks.
.IP \(bu
Transport: HTTP Basic Auth over cleartext HTTP exposes credentials on the wire.
Use TLS (port 8443) or a trusted internal network.
.IP \(bu
No dynamic memory allocation in the hot path: fixed-size static arrays.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ats-ctl (1),
.BR trafficserver (8),
.BR traffic_ctl (8)
